@c -*- coding:utf-8 -*-

@c EN
@item SRFI-0, Feature-based conditional expansion construct.
This has become a part of R7RS small.  Gauche supports this as
Built-in.   @xref{Feature conditional}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-0, 機能ベースの条件展開
R7RS smallに取り込まれました。Gaucheは組み込みでサポートしています。
@ref{Feature conditional}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-1, List library (R7RS lists)
This has become a part of R7RS large.  @xref{R7RS lists}.
(Some of SRFI-1 procedures are built-in).
@c JP
@item SRFI-1, リストライブラリ
これはR7RS largeの一部になりました。@ref{R7RS lists}参照。
SRFI-1の手続きのうちいくつかは組み込みになっています。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-2, AND-LET*: an AND with local bindings, a guarded LET* special form.
Supported natively.  @xref{Binding constructs}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-2, AND-LET*: 局所束縛をともなう AND、ガード付 LET* 特殊フォーム
組み込みです。@ref{Binding constructs}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-4, Homogeneous numeric vector datatypes.
The module @code{gauche.uvector} provides a superset of
@code{srfi.4} procedures, including arithmetic operations and
generic interface on the SRFI-4 vectors.  @xref{Uniform vectors}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-4, 一様な数値ベクタ型
モジュール@code{gauche.uvector}が
@code{srfi.4}の上位互換手続きを提供します。
同モジュールにはSRFI-4の手続きに加え、
算術演算やジェネリックなインタフェースが定義されています。@ref{Uniform vectors}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-5, A compatible let form with signatures and rest arguments
Supported by the module @code{srfi.5}.
@xref{A compatible let form with signatures and rest arguments}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-5, シグネチャとrest引数に互換性のあるlet形式
モジュール@code{srfi.5}でサポートされます。
@ref{A compatible let form with signatures and rest arguments}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-6, Basic String Ports.
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Gauche supports this as built-in.  @xref{String ports}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-6, 基本文字列ポート
これはR7RS smallの一部になりました。
Gaucheは組み込みでサポートしています。@ref{String ports}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-7, Feature-based program configuration language
Supported as an autoloaded macro.
@xref{Feature-based program configuration language}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-7, 機能ベースプログラム設定言語
オートロードされるマクロとしてサポートされています。
@ref{Feature-based program configuration language}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-8, receive: Binding to multiple values.
Syntax @code{receive} is built-in.  @xref{Binding constructs}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-8, receive: 多値束縛
構文@code{receive}は組み込みになっています。@ref{Binding constructs}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-9, Defining record types.
Supported by the module @code{gauche.record}.  @xref{Record types}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-9, レコード型の定義
モジュール@code{gauche.record}でサポートされます。@ref{Record types}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-10, Sharp-comma external form.
Built-in.  @xref{Read-time constructor}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-10, Sharp-comma外部フォーム
組み込みです。@ref{Read-time constructor}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-11, Syntax for receiving multiple values.
This has become a part of R7RS small.  Gauche supports it
as built-in.  @xref{Binding constructs}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-11, 多値を受け取るための構文
これはR7RS smallの一部になりました。Gaucheは組み込みでサポートしています。
@ref{Binding constructs}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-13, String library
Supported by the module @code{srfi.13}.  @xref{String library}.
(Some of SRFI-13 procedures are built-in).
@c JP
@item SRFI-13, 文字列ライブラリ
モジュール@code{srfi.13}でサポートされます。@ref{String library}参照。
(SRFI-13の手続きのいくつかは組み込みになっています。)
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-14, Character-set library
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Character-set object and a few procedures are built-in.
@xref{Character sets}.
Complete set of SRFI-14 is supported by the module @code{scheme.charset}.
@xref{R7RS character sets}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-14, 文字集合のライブラリ
これはR7RS largeの一部になりました。
文字集合と基本的な手続きは組み込みになっています。
@ref{Character sets}参照。
SRFI-14の完全なサポートはモジュール@code{scheme.charset}
で提供されています。@ref{R7RS character sets}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-16, Syntax for procedures of variable arity (case-lambda)
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Built-in.  @xref{Making procedures}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-16, 可変長引数手続き構文 (case-lambda)
これはR7RS smallの一部になりました。
組み込みです。@ref{Making procedures}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-17, Generalized set!
Built-in.  @xref{Assignments}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-17, 一般化された set!
組み込みです。@ref{Assignments}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-18, Multithreading support
Some SRFI-18 features are built-in, and the rest is in @code{gauche.threads}
module.  @xref{Threads}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-18, マルチスレッドのサポート
いくつかのSRFI-18の機能は組み込みであり、、残りのAPIは
@code{gauche.threads}モジュールで提供されます。@ref{Threads}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-19, Time Data Types and Procedures.
Time data type is Gauche built-in (@pxref{Time}).
Complete set of SRFI-19 is supported by the module @code{srfi.19}.
@xref{Time data types and procedures}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-19, 時間データの型と手続き
時間のデータ型はGauche組み込みです(@ref{Time}参照)。
SRFI-19の完全なサポートはモジュール@code{srfi.19}で提供されています。
@ref{Time data types and procedures}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-22, Running Scheme scripts on Unix
Supported.  @xref{Writing Scheme scripts}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-22, UNIX 上の Scheme スクリプトの実行
サポートされています。@ref{Writing Scheme scripts}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-23, Error reporting mechanism.
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Built-in.   @xref{Signaling exceptions}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-23, エラー報告機構
これはR7RS smallの一部になりました。
組み込みです。@ref{Signaling exceptions}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-25, Multi-dimensional array primitives.
Supported by the module @code{gauche.array}, which defines
superset of SRFI-25.  @xref{Arrays}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-25, 多次元配列のプリミティブ
モジュール@code{gauche.array}が、SRFI-25の上位互換と
なっています。@ref{Arrays}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-26, Notation for specializing parameters without currying.
Built-in.  @xref{Making procedures}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-26, カリー化をともなわないパラメータの特殊化記法。組み込みです。
@ref{Making procedures}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-27, Sources of Random Bits.
Supported by the module @code{srfi.27}.  @xref{Sources of random bits}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-27, ランダムビットのソース
モジュール@code{srfi.27}でサポートされます。@ref{Sources of random bits}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-28, Basic format strings.
Gauche's built-in @code{format} procedure is a superset of
SRFI-28 @code{format}.  @xref{Output}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-28, 基本フォーマット文字列
Gauche組み込みの@code{format}がSRFI-28のものの上位互換に
なっています。@ref{Output}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-29, Localization
Supported by the module @code{srfi.29}.
@xref{Localization}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-29, 地域化
モジュール@code{srfi.29}でサポートされます。
@ref{Localization}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-30, Nested multi-line comments.
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Supported by the native reader.  @xref{Lexical structure}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-30, ネストした複数行コメント
これはR7RS smallの一部になりました。
ネイティブのリーダでサポートされています。@ref{Lexical structure}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-31, A special form rec for recursive evaluation.  Built-in.
@xref{Binding constructs}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-31, 再帰評価用の特殊フォーム@code{rec}. 組み込みです。
@ref{Binding constructs}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-34, Exception Handling for Programs
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Built-in.  @xref{Exceptions}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-34, プログラムの例外処理
これはR7RS smallの一部になりました。
組み込みです。@ref{Exceptions}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-35, Conditions
Built-in.  @xref{Conditions}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-35, コンディション
組み込みです。@ref{Conditions}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-36, I/O Conditions
Partly supported.  @xref{Conditions}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-36, I/O コンディション
部分的にサポートされています.  @ref{Conditions}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-37, args-fold: a program argument processor
Supported by the module @code{srfi.37}.
@xref{A program argument processor}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-37, args-fold: プログラム引数処理
モジュール@code{srfi.37}でサポートされます。
@ref{A program argument processor}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-38, External Representation for Data With Shared Structure
Built-in.  See @ref{Reading data} and @ref{Output}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-38, 共有されるデータの外部表現
組み込みです。@ref{Reading data}と@ref{Output}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-39, Parameter objects
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Built-in (@pxref{Parameters}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-39, パラメータオブジェクト
これはR7RS smallの一部になりました。
組み込みです。@ref{Parameters}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-40, A Library of Streams
Supported by the module @code{util.stream}.
@xref{Stream library}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-40, ストリームライブラリ
モジュール@code{util.stream}でサポートされています。
@ref{Stream library}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-41, Streams
This has become a part of R7RS large.  @xref{R7RS stream}.
Most of stream procedures are also in @code{util.stream}
(@pxref{Stream library}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-41, ストリーム
これはR7RS largeの一部になりました。@ref{R7RS stream}参照。
ストリーム手続きのほぼ全ては@code{util.stream}からも提供されています
(@ref{Stream library}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-42, Eager comprehensions
Supported by the module @code{srfi.42}.
@xref{Eager comprehensions}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-42, 先行評価的内包表記
モジュール@code{srfi.42}でサポートされます。
@ref{Eager comprehensions}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-43, Vector library
Supported by the module @code{srfi.43}.
@xref{Vector library (Legacy)}.
Note that this srfi is superseded by R7RS @code{scheme.vector}
library (formerly known as @code{srfi.133}).  @xref{R7RS vectors}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-43, ベクタライブラリ
モジュール@code{srfi.43}でサポートされます。
@ref{Vector library (Legacy)}参照。
註：このsrfiはR7RSの@code{scheme.vector}ライブラリ
(@code{srfi.133}として導入されたもの)により置き換えられました。
@ref{R7RS vectors}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-45, Primitives for Expressing Iterative Lazy Algorithms
Built-in.
@xref{Lazy evaluation}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-45, 反復的 Lazy アルゴリズムのための基本関数
組み込みです。
@ref{Lazy evaluation}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-46, Basic Syntax-rules Extensions
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Built-in.
@xref{Hygienic macros}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-46, 基本的なsyntax-rulesの拡張
これはR7RS smallの一部となりました。
組み込みです。
@ref{Hygienic macros}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-55, require-extension
Supported as an autoloaded macro.
@xref{Requiring extensions}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-55, requireの拡張
オートロードマクロとしてサポートされます。
@ref{Requiring extensions}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-60, Integers as bits
Most procedures are built-in: @xref{R7RS bitwise operations}.
The complete support is in @code{srfi.60} module: @xref{Integers as bits}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-60, 整数に対するビット操作
ほとんどの手続きは組み込みになっています。@ref{R7RS bitwise operations}参照。
完全なサポートは@code{srfi.60}モジュールで提供されます。
@ref{Integers as bits}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-61, A more general @code{cond} clause
Supported natively.  @xref{Conditionals}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-61, より汎用的な@code{cond}節
組み込みです。@ref{Conditionals}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-62, S-expression comments
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Supported by the native reader.  @xref{Lexical structure}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-62, S式コメント
これはR7RS smallの一部となりました。
ネイティブのリーダでサポートされています。@ref{Lexical structure}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-64, A Scheme API for test suites
Supported by the module @code{srfi.64}. @xref{A Scheme API for test suites}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-64, テストスイートのためのScheme API
モジュール@code{srfi.64}でサポートされます。@ref{A Scheme API for test suites}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-66, Octet vectors
Supported by the module @code{srfi.66} (@pxref{Octet vectors}).
This is mostly a subset of @code{gauche.uvector}, but has one
slight difference.
@c JP
@item SRFI-66, オクテットベクタ
モジュール@code{srfi.66}でサポートされます (@ref{Octet vectors}参照)。
ほぼ@code{gauche.uvector}のサブセットですが、
一ヶ所だけ違いがあります。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-69, Basic hash tables
Supported by the module @code{srfi.69} (@pxref{Basic hash tables}).
Note that this srfi is superseded by R7RS @code{scheme.hash-table}
library (formerly known as @code{srfi.125}).
@xref{R7RS hash tables}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-69, 基本的なハッシュテーブル
モジュール@code{srfi.69}でサポートされます (@ref{Basic hash tables}参照)。
このsrfiはR7RSの@code{scheme.hash-table}
(@code{srfi.125}として導入されたもの) で置き換えられました。
詳しくは@ref{R7RS hash tables}を参照してください。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-74, Octet-addressed binary blocks
Supported by the module @code{srfi.74} (@pxref{Octet-addressed binary blocks}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-74, オクテット毎にアクセス可能なバイナリブロック
モジュール@code{srfi.74}でサポートされます (@ref{Octet-addressed binary blocks}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-78, Lightweight testing
Supported by the module @code{srfi.78}.
It can work with @code{gauche.test}.  @xref{Lightweight testing}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-78, 軽いテストフレームワーク
モジュール@code{srfi.78}でサポートされます。
@code{gauche.test}と一緒に使うこともできます。@ref{Lightweight testing}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-87, @code{=>} in case clauses
This has become a part of R7RS small.
Supported natively.  @xref{Conditionals}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-87, case節での@code{=>}
これはR7RS smallの一部となりました。
組込みです。@ref{Conditionals}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-95, Sorting and merging
Supported natively.  @xref{Sorting and merging}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-95, ソートとマージ
組み込みです。@ref{Sorting and merging}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-96, SLIB Prerequisites
This srfi is not exactly a library, but
rather a description of features the platform should provide
to support SLIB.  In order to load this module, SLIB must be
already installed.  @xref{SLIB}, for the details.
@c JP
@item SRFI-96, SLIB必要事項
このsrfiはライブラリというよりは、SLIBをサポートするためにプラットフォームが
提供しなければならない機能要件を記述するものです。このモジュールをロードするためには、
SLIBが既にインストールされていることが必要です。
詳しくは@ref{SLIB}を参照してください。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-98, An interface to access environment variables
Supported by the module @code{srfi.98}.  @xref{Accessing environment variables}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-98, 環境変数にアクセスするためのインタフェース
モジュール@code{srfi.98}でサポートされます。@ref{Accessing environment variables}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-99, ERR5RS Records
Supported by the module @code{gauche.record}.  @xref{Record types}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-99, ERR5RS レコード
モジュール@code{gauche.record}でサポートされます。@ref{Record types}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-101, Purely functional random-access pairs and lists
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.rlist}
(@pxref{R7RS random-access lists}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-101, 純粋に関数的でランダムアクセス可能なペアとリスト
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.rlist}でサポートされます
(@ref{R7RS random-access lists}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-106, Basic socket interface
Supported by the module @code{srfi.106}.  @xref{Basic socket interface}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-106, 基本的なソケットインタフェース
モジュール@code{srfi.106}でサポートされます。@ref{Basic socket interface}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-111, Boxes
This has become a part of R7RS large as @code{scheme.box}.
Gauche has it as built-in.  @xref{Boxes}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-111, ボックス
これは@code{scheme.box}としてR7RS largeの一部となりました。
Gaucheは組み込みでサポートしています。@ref{Boxes}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-112, Environment inquiry
Supported by the module @code{srfi.112}.
@xref{Portable runtime environment inquiry}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-112, 環境の問い合わせ
モジュール@code{srfi.112}でサポートされます。
@ref{Portable runtime environment inquiry}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-113, Sets and Bags
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.set}.  @xref{R7RS sets}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-113, セットとバッグ
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.set}でサポートされます。 @ref{R7RS sets}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-114, Comparators
Some of the features are built-in (@pxref{Basic comparators}).  Full srfi spec is supported by the module @code{srfi.114} (@pxref{Comparators}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-114, 比較器
いくつかの機能は組み込みです(@ref{Basic comparators}参照)。srfiの完全な仕様はモジュール@code{srfi.114}でサポートされます(@ref{Comparators}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-115, Scheme Regular Expressions
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.regex}.  @xref{R7RS regular expressions}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-115, Scheme正規表現
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.regex}でサポートされます。@ref{R7RS regular expressions}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-116, Immutable List Library
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Immutable pairs are supported natively (@pxref{Mutable and immutable pairs}).
Full set of APIs are available
in the module @code{scheme.ilist} (@pxref{R7RS immutable lists}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-116, 変更不可リストのライブラリ
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
変更不可なペアはGauche本体で直接サポートされます(@ref{Mutable and immutable pairs}参照)。
フルセットのAPIは モジュール@code{scheme.ilist}でサポートされます(@ref{R7RS immutable lists}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-117, Queues based on lists.
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.list-queue}, which is implemented on top
of @code{data.queue}.
(@pxref{R7RS list queues})
@c JP
@item SRFI-117, リストを元にしたキュー
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
@code{data.queue}上に実装されたモジュール@code{scheme.list-queue}でサポートされます。
(@ref{R7RS list queues}参照)
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-118, Simple adjustable-size strings
Supported by the module @code{srfi.118}.
(@pxref{Simple adjustable-size strings})
@c JP
@item SRFI-118, 簡単な可変長文字列
モジュール@code{srfi.118}でサポートされます。
(@ref{Simple adjustable-size strings}参照)
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-120, Timer APIs
Supported by the module @code{srfi.120} (@pxref{Timer APIs}).
It is a wrapper of @code{control.scheduler} (@pxref{Scheduler}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-120, タイマーAPI
モジュール@code{srfi.120}でサポートされます (@ref{Timer APIs}参照)。
これは@code{control.scheduler}のラッパーです (@ref{Scheduler}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-121, Generators
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Gauche's @code{gauche.generator} is superset of srfi-121
(@pxref{Generators}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-121, ジェネレータ
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
Gaucheの@code{gauche.generator}がsrfi-121のスーパーセットになっています。
(@ref{Generators}参照)
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-124, Ephemerons
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by @code{scheme.ephemeron}.
Note: Current Gauche's implementation isn't optimal.
@xref{R7RS ephemerons}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-124, Ephemeron
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
@code{scheme.ephemeron}モジュールでサポートされます
(註: 現在のGaucheでの実装は理想的ではありません。)
@ref{R7RS ephemerons}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-125, Intermediate hash tables
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by @code{scheme.hash-table}
(@pxref{R7RS hash tables}).
Note that Gauche's native interface provides the same functionalities, but
under slightly different names for the backward compatibility.
@xref{Hashtables}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-125, ハッシュテーブル中位層
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
@code{scheme.hash-table}モジュールでサポートされます
(@ref{R7RS hash tables}参照)。
Gaucheの組み込みインタフェースも同じ機能を提供していますが、
既存のコードとの互換性のために名前が若干異なります (@ref{Hashtables}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-127, Lazy sequences
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by @code{scheme.lseq} (@pxref{R7RS lazy sequences}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-127, 遅延シーケンス
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
@code{scheme.lseq}モジュールでサポートされます。
@ref{R7RS lazy sequences}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-128, Comparators (reduced)
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Built-in.  @xref{Basic comparators}, for the details.
@c JP
@item SRFI-128, 比較器 (縮小版)
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
組み込みです。@ref{Basic comparators}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-129, Titlecase procedures
The procedures @code{char-title-case?} and @code{char-titlecase} are
built-in, and @code{string-titlecase} is in @code{gauche.unicode}.
For the compatibility, you can @code{(use srfi.129)} or
@code{(import (srfi 129))} to get these three procedures.
@c JP
@item SRFI-129, Titlecase手続き
@code{char-title-case?}と@code{char-titlecase}は組み込みで、
@code{string-titlecase}は@code{gauche.unicode}モジュールにあります。
互換性のため、@code{(use srfi.129)}や@code{(import (srfi 129))}とすれば
この3つの手続きがインポートされます。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-130, Cursor-based string library
String cursors are supported natively (@pxref{String cursors}).
Most of built-in and srfi-13 string procedures accept cursors in addition
to indexes.  The module srfi-130 provides several procedures that
has the same name as srfi-13 but returns a string cursor instead
of an index (@pxref{Cursor-based string library}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-130, カーソルベースの文字列ライブラリ
文字列カーソルは組み込みでサポートされています (@ref{String cursors}参照)。
また、多くの組み込みおよびsrfi-13手続きはインデックスに加えてカーソルも
取れるようになっています。モジュールsrfi-130は、srfi-13と同名だけれど
インデックスの代わりにカーソルを返す手続きを提供します
(@ref{Cursor-based string library}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-131, ERR5RS Record Syntax (reduced)
This srfi is a pure subset of srfi-99, and @code{gauche.record}'s
@code{define-record-type} covers it.  @xref{Record types}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-131, ERR5RSレコード構文 (簡易版)
このsrfiはsrfi-99のサブセットで、@code{gauche.record}の
@code{define-record-type}でカバーされます。@ref{Record types}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-132, Sort libraries
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.sort}.
@xref{R7RS sort}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-132, ソートライブラリ
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.sort}でサポートされます。
@ref{R7RS sort}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-133, Vector library (R7RS-compatible)
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.vector}.  @xref{R7RS vectors}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-133, ベクタライブラリ (R7RS互換)
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.vector}でサポートされます。 @ref{R7RS vectors}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-134, Immutable Deques
This has become a part of R7RS large.
The module @code{data.ideque} is compatible to srfi-134.
@xref{Immutable deques}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-134, 変更不可な両端キュー
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{data.ideque}がsrfi-134と互換です。
@ref{変更不可な両端キュー}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-135, Immutable Texts
This has become a part of R7RS large.
In Gauche, the text type is not disjoint from the string type.  Instead,
a text is simply an immutable and indexed string.
@xref{String indexing}, for the detail of indexed string.
The API is described in @ref{R7RS immutable texts}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-135, 変更不可なテキスト
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
Gaucheではtext型はstring型と独立してはおらず、
textは単に「変更不可でインデクスされた文字列」にすぎません。
文字列のインデクシングについては@ref{String indexing}を参照してください。
APIは@ref{R7RS immutable texts}で説明しています。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-138, Compiling Scheme programs to executables
Supported, except honoring @code{COMPILE_R7RS} environment variable.
@xref{Comamnd to compile scripts}, for the details.
@c JP
@item SRFI-138, Scheme プログラムを実行可能ファイルにコンパイルする
@code{COMPILE_R7RS}環境変数の扱いに差異があることを除き、
サポートされています。
@ref{Comamnd to compile scripts}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-139, Syntax parameters
Built-in.  @xref{Syntax parameters}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-139, 構文パラメータ
組み込みです。@ref{Syntax parameters}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-141, Integer division
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.division}.  @xref{R7RS integer division}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-141, 整数除算
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.division}でサポートされます。@ref{R7RS integer division}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-143, Finxums
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.fixnum}.  @xref{R7RS fixnum}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-143, Fixnums
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.fixnum}でサポートされます。@ref{R7RS fixnum}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-144, Flonums
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.flonum}.  @xref{R7RS flonum}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-144, Flonums
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.flonum}でサポートされます。@ref{R7RS flonum}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-145, Assumptions
Built-in.  @xref{Conditionals}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-145, アサンプション
組み込みです。@ref{Conditionals}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-146, Mappings
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.mapping}.
@xref{R7RS mappings}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-146, マッピング
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.mapping}でサポートされます。
@ref{R7RS mappings}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-149, Basic syntax-rules template extensions
The built-in @code{syntax-rules} support @code{srfi.149}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-149, 基本的なsyntax-rulesの拡張
組み込みの@code{syntax-rules}は@code{srfi.149}に対応しています。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-151, Bitwise operations
Supported by the module @code{srfi.151} (@pxref{R7RS bitwise operations}).
Note that many equivalent procedures are provided built-in
(@pxref{Basic bitwise operations}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-151, ビット演算
モジュール@code{srfi.151}でサポートされます (@ref{R7RS bitwise operations}参照)。
なお、組み込みでも多くの手続きについては同等の手続きが提供されています
(@ref{Basic bitwise operations}参照).
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-152, String library (reduced)
Supported by the module @code{srfi.152} (@pxref{String library (reduced)}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-152, 文字列ライブラリ(簡略版)
モジュール@code{srfi.152}でサポートされます (@ref{String library (reduced)}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-154, First-class dynamic extents
Suppored by the module @code{srfi.154}.  (@pxref{First-class dynamic extents}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-154, 第一級の動的エクステント
モジュール@code{srfi.154}でサポートされます。(@ref{First-class dynamic extents}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-158, Generators and accumulators
This has become a part of R7RS large.
Supported by the module @code{scheme.generator}
(@pxref{R7RS generators}).
Note that most of generator procedures are supported by @code{gauche.generator}
(@pxref{Generators}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-158, ジェネレータとアキュムレータ
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.generator}でサポートされます
 (@ref{R7RS generators}参照)。
ジェネレータ手続きのほとんどは、@code{gauche.generator}でもサポートされています
(@ref{Generators}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-159, Combinator Formatting
This has become a part of R7RS large.  @xref{R7RS combinator formatting}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-159, コンビネータによるフォーマッタ
これはR7RS largeの一部になりました。@ref{R7RS combinator formatting}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-160, Homogeneous numeric vector libraries
This has become a part of R7RS large,
supported by the module @code{scheme.vector.@@} where
@code{@@} is one of @code{base},
@code{u8}, @code{s8}, @code{u16}, @code{s16},
@code{u32}, @code{s32}, @code{u64}, @code{s64}, @code{f32}, @code{f64},
@code{c64}, or @code{c128} (@pxref{R7RS uniform vectors}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-160, 均質な数値ベクタライブラリ
これはR7RS largeの一部となりました。
モジュール@code{scheme.vector.@@}でサポートされます
(但し@code{@@}は@code{base},
@code{u8}, @code{s8}, @code{u16}, @code{s16},
@code{u32}, @code{s32}, @code{u64}, @code{s64}, @code{f32}, @code{f64},
@code{c64}, @code{c128})。
@ref{R7RS uniform vectors}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-162, Comparators sublibrary
Supported by the module @code{srfi.162}.  @xref{Comparator sublibrary}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-162, 比較器のサブライブラリ
モジュール@code{srfi.162}でサポートされます。@ref{Comparator sublibrary}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-169, Underscores in numbers
Supported by the built-in reader.  @xref{Lexical structure}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-169, 数値中のアンダースコア
組み込みのリーダーでサポートされています。@ref{Lexical structure}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-170, POSIX API
Supported by the module @code{srfi.170}.  @xref{POSIX API}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-170, POSIX API
モジュール@code{srfi.170}でサポートされます。@ref{POSIX API}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-172, Two safer subsets of R7RS
Supported by the modules @code{srfi.172} and @code{srfi.172.functional}.
@xref{Two safer subsets of R7RS}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-172, 二つの安全なR7RSサブセット
モジュール@code{srfi.172}と@code{srfi.172.functional}でサポートされます。
@ref{Two safer subsets of R7RS}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-173, Hooks
Supported by the module @code{srfi.173} (@pxref{Hooks (srfi)}),
which is a thin layer on top of @code{gauche.hook} (@pxref{Hooks})
@c JP
@item SRFI-173, フック
モジュール@code{srfi.173}でサポートされます (@ref{Hooks (srfi)}参照) 。
それ自体は@code{gauche.hook}の上にかぶせた薄いレイヤです (@ref{Hooks}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-174, POSIX Timespecs
Supported by the module @code{srfi.174} (@pxref{POSIX timespecs}).
In Gauche, the timespec type is the same as built-in @code{<time>}
object, which is also the same as srfi-19 time.
@c JP
@item SRFI-174, POSIX Timespec
モジュール@code{srfi.174}でサポートされます (@ref{POSIX timespecs}参照)。
Gaucheでは、timespecオブジェクトは組み込みの@code{<time>}オブジェクトであり、
またsrfi-19のtimeオブジェクトとも共通です。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-175, ASCII character library
Supported by the module @code{srfi.175} (@pxref{ASCII character library}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-175, ASCII文字ライブラリ
モジュール@code{srfi.175}でサポートされます(@ref{ASCII character library}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-176, Version flag
Supported as a command-line flag of @code{gosh}.
The @code{version-alist} procedure is built-in.
@c JP
@item SRFI-176, バージョンフラグ
@code{gosh}のコマンドライン引数としてサポートされます。
@code{version-alist}手続きは組み込みです。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-178, Bitvector library
The basic support is built-in (@pxref{Bitvectors}).
Complete support is in the module @code{srfi.178} (@pxref{Bitvector library}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-178, ビットベクタライブラリ
基本的なサポートは組み込みです (@ref{Bitvectors}参照)。
完全なサポートはモジュール@code{srfi.178}にあります(@ref{Bitvector library}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-180, JSON
Supported by the module @code{srfi.180} (@pxref{JSON}).
Note that Gauche also has @code{rfc.json},
and @code{srfi.180} is implemented on top of it.
@c JP
@item SRFI-180, JSON
モジュール@code{srfi.180}でサポートされます (@ref{JSON}参照)。
Gaucheには@code{rfc.json}もあって、@code{srfi.180}は
@code{rfc.json}の上に実装されています。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-181, Custom ports
Supported by the module @code{srfi.181} (@pxref{Custom ports}).
Gauche has an original custom port mechanism (@pxref{Virtual ports}), and
This srfi is built in top of it.
@c JP
@item SRFI-181, カスタムポート
モジュール@code{srfi.181}でサポートされます (@ref{Custom ports}参照)。
Gaucheは独自のカスタムポートメカニズムを持っており(@ref{Virtual ports}参照)、
このsrfiはその上に作られています。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-185, Linear adjustable-length strings
Supported by the module @code{srfi.185}.
@xref{Linear adjustable-length strings}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-185, 線形更新な可変長文字列
モジュール@code{srfi.185}でサポートされます。
@ref{Linear adjustable-length strings}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-189, Maybe and Either: optional container types
Supported by the module @code{srfi.189}.
@xref{Maybe and Either optional container types}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-189, MaybeとEither: オプショナルなコンテナ型
モジュール@code{srfi.189}でサポートされます。
@ref{Maybe and Either optional container types}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-190, Coroutine generators
Supported by the module @code{srfi.190}.
@xref{Coroutine generators}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-190, コルーチンジェネレータ
モジュール@code{srfi.190}でサポートされます。
@ref{Coroutine generators}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-192, Port positioning
Gauche's port already has positining mechanism, so main procedures
are built-in (@pxref{Common port operations}).
A few additional procedures are provided by the module @code{srfi.192}
(@pxref{Port positioning}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-192, ポート位置
Gaucheのポートは既に位置の問い合わせと設定機能を持っており、
主要な手続きは組み込みになっています(@ref{Common port operations}参照)。
組み込みでない追加手続きはモジュール@code{srfi.192}にあります
(@ref{Port positioning}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-193, Command line
Two procedures, @code{command-line} and @code{script-file}, are
built-in.  Other APIs are provided by the module @code{srfi.193}
(@pxref{Command line}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-193, コマンドライン
@code{command-line}と@code{script-file}の二つの手続きは組み込みです。
他のAPIはモジュール@code{srfi.193}で提供されます (@ref{Command line}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-194, Random data generators
Supported by the module @code{srfi.194} (@pxref{Random data generators (SRFI)}),
which is based on @code{data.random} (@pxref{Random data generators}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-194, ランダムデータの生成
モジュール@code{srfi.194}でサポートされます(@ref{Random data generators (SRFI)}参照)。
それ自体はGaucheの@code{data.random}を元にしています(@pxref{Random data generators}参照).
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-195, Multiple-value boxes
Built-in.  @xref{Boxes}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-195, 多値ボックス
組み込みです。@ref{Boxes}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-196, Range objects
Suppored by the module @code{srfi.196}.  Also the @code{data.range}
module is the superset of this srfi (@pxref{Range}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-196, モジュール@code{srfi.196}でサポートされます。また、@code{data.range}モジュールは
このsrfiの上位互換になっています (@ref{Range}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-197, Pipeline operators
Supported by the module @code{srfi.197} (@pxref{Pipeline operators}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-197, パイプラインオペレータ
モジュール@code{srfi.197}でサポートされます (@ref{Pipeline operators}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-207, String-notated bytevectors
Bytestring literals are supported by the core.  Bytestring procedures
are available in the module @code{srfi.207}
(@pxref{String-notated bytevectors}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-207, 文字列表示のバイトベクタ
バイトストリングリテラルは組み込みでサポートされます。
バイトストリングを扱う手続きはモジュール@code{srfi.207}で提供されます
(@ref{String-notated bytevectors}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-209, Enums and enum sets
Supported by the module @code{srfi.209} (@pxref{Enums and enum sets}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-209, Enumとenum集合
モジュール@code{srfi.209}でサポートされます (@ref{Enums and enum sets}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-210, Procedures and syntax for multiple values
Supported by the module @code{srfi.210}
(@pxref{Procedures and syntax for multiple values}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-210, 多値のための手続きと構文
モジュール@code{srfi.210}でサポートされます
(@ref{Procedures and syntax for multiple values}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-215, Central log exchange
Supported by the module @code{srfi.215}
(@pxref{Central log exchange}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-215, 中央ログ交換局
モジュール@code{srfi.215}でサポートされます
(@ref{Central log exchange}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-216, SICP Prerequisites
Supporetd by the module @code{srfi.216}
(@pxref{SICP prerequisites}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-216, SICP用ライブラリ
モジュール@code{srfi.216}でサポートされます
(@ref{SICP prerequisites}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-217, Integer sets
Supported by the module @code{srfi.217}
(@pxref{Integer sets}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-217, 整数集合
@code{srfi.217}でサポートされます
(@ref{Integer sets}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-219, Define higher-order lambda
Gauche's built-in @code{define} (both R7RS-compatible one and
extended one) supports this feature.
If you import srfi-219 explicitly, it imports @code{null#define}.
@xref{Define higher-order lambda}, for the details.
@c JP
@item SRFI-219, 高階lambdaの定義
Gauche組み込みの@code{define}は (R7RS互換のものも拡張のものも)
この機能をサポートしています。
陽にsrfi-219をインポートした場合は、@code{null#define}がインポートされます。
詳しくは@ref{Define higher-order lambda}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-221, Generator/accumulator sub-library
Supported by the module @code{srfi.221}
(@pxref{Generator/accumulator sub-library}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-221, ジェネレータ/アキュムレータ サブライブラリ
@code{srfi.221}でサポートされます
(@ref{Generator/accumulator sub-library}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-222, Compound objects
Supported by the module @code{srfi.222}
(@pxref{Compound objects}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-222, 複合オブジェクト
@code{srfi.222}でサポートされます
(@ref{Compound objects}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-226, Control features
Partially supported as built-in and @code{gauche.threads} module.
@xref{Control features} for the details.
@c JP
@item SRFI-226, 制御機構
一部分を、組み込みと@code{gauche.threads}モジュールでサポートしています。
詳しくは@ref{Control features}を参照してください。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-227, Optional arguments
Supported by the module @code{srfi.227}
(@pxref{Optional arguments}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-227, 省略可能引数
モジュール@code{srfi.227}でサポートされます
(@ref{Optional arguments}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-228, Composing comparators
Supported by the module @code{srfi.228}
(@pxref{Composing comparators}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-228, 比較器の合成
@code{srfi.228}でサポートされます
(@ref{Composing comparators}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-229, Tagged procedures
Supported by the module @code{srfi.229}
(@pxref{Tagged procedures}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-229, 手続きタグ
@code{srfi.229}でサポートされます。
(@ref{Tagged procedures}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-230, Atomic Operations
Supported by the module @code{srfi.230}
(@pxref{Atomic operations}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-230, アトミックな操作
@code{srfi.230}でサポートされます。
(@ref{Atomic operations}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-232, Flexible curried procedures
Supported by the module @code{srfi.232}
(@pxref{Flexible curried procedures}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-232, 柔軟なカリー化された手続き
@code{srfi.232}でサポートされます
(@ref{Flexible curried procedures}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-234, Topological sorting
Supported by the module @code{srfi.234}
(@pxref{Topological sorting}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-234, トポロジカルソート
@code{srfi.234}でサポートされます
(@ref{Topological sorting}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-235, Combinators (SRFI)
Supported by the module @code{srfi.235}
(@pxref{Combinators (SRFI)}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-235, コンビネータ (SRFI)
@code{srfi.235}でサポートされます
(@ref{Combinators (SRFI)}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-236, Evaluating expressions in an unspecified order
Built-in. @xref{Grouping}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-236, 順序を問わない式の評価
組み込みです。@ref{Grouping}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-238, Codesets
Supported by the mdoule @code{srfi.238}
(@pxref{Codesets}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-238, コードセット
@code{srfi.238}でサポートされます
(@ref{Codesets}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-239, Destructuring lists
Supported by the module @code{srfi.239}
(@pxref{Destructuring lists}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-239, リストの分解
@code{srfi.239}でサポートされます
(@ref{Destructuring lists}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-244, Multiple-value definitions
Built-in. @xref{Definitions}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-244, 多値定義
組み込みです。@ref{Definitions}参照。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-247, Syntactic monads
Supported by the module @code{srfi.247}
(@pxref{Syntactic monads}).
@c JP
@item SRFI-247, 構文的モナド
@code{srfi.247}でサポートされます
(@ref{Syntactic monads}参照)。
@c COMMON

@c EN
@item SRFI-252, Property testing
Supported by the module @code{srfi.252}
(@pxref{Property testing}.
@c JP
@item SRFI-252, プロパティテスト
@code{srfi.252}でサポートされます
(@ref{プロパティテスト}参照)。
@c COMMON

